Master Thesis

A.V. RIIS

2013




  Statutory Declaration

I hereby declare that the thesis has been written by myself 
without any external unauthorised help, that it has been neither 
presented to any institution for evaluation nor previously 
published in its entirety or in parts. Any parts, words or ideas, 
of the thesis, however limited, and including tables, graphs, 
maps etc., which are quoted from or based on other sources have 
been acknowledged as such without exception.




Abstract

Abstract




  Keywords

• economic growth

• institional measures

• political constraints




Table of Contents








1 Introduction

This project will look further into the institutional 
determinants of economic progress. The main econometric models 
attempt to replicate the findings of Henisz (2000). This project 
will use the standard linear pooled model, GLS and GMM to attempt 
to determine how institutions and political constraints influence 
economic growth of countries by using a variety of institutional 
measures.

“(...) many politicians are being shockingly irresponsible. In 
different ways, politicians’ actions (or inaction) are the 
biggest short-term danger facing the American, European and 
Chinese economies. Judging by politicians’ current behaviour, the 
world economy could slow a lot further. It could even tip into 
recession in 2013.”[footnote:
‘The World Economy: Investors, Beware’, The Economist, 6 October 
2012, [http://www.economist.com/node/21564232]. 
]

2 Hypothesis, Research Question and Scope of Paper

The underlying assumption of this paper is that the political 
organization of a given country has a significant influence on 
the degree to which this country experiences economic growth and 
development. Moreover, it is hypothesised that certain political 
constraints can be identified in order to pinpoint how, if at 
all, political organization in this sense is related to economic 
growth.

3 Literature Review

Determining which way the causality runs when looking at the 
influence of institutions on economic growth is a contentious 
topic. The question is whether democratic institutions cause 
economic growth, i.e. that countries with a higher degree of 
democracy are more prone to economic progress compared to 
countries with more autocratic characteristics, or whether 
countries that are more economically developed are more likely to 
foster democratic institutions. A simple, but compelling test can 
be undertaken by looking at the Korean Peninsula. Looking at the 
divergent paths of North and South Korea there is evidence that 
democratic institutions cause economic growth and not vice versa. 
Economic progress of South Korea result of institutional path 
choosen after the end of the war in 1953 (Glaeser et al., 2004, p. 272)
.

Another topic that is important to tackle in understanding the 
institutional influence on economic growth is how institutions 
are measured. Glaeser et al. (2004) looks at three measures of 
institutions, namely risk of appropriation, quality of government 
and constraints on the executive.

However, even before one decides on how to measures institutions, 
they must defined. A concise and precise notion of instutions is 
that they are in essence constraints (North 1981, quoted in 
Glaeser et al. 2004) and that they are permanent or stable 
(Glaeser et al. 2004, quoted in Voigt, 2013, p. 3). The 
frequently used measures such as those from the International 
Country Risk Guide, the Governance Indicators from the World Bank 
(Kaufmann et al., 2010) and the Polity IV measures. Glaeser et 
al. argues that these do neither measure the stability of 
institutions nor their constraints, but only policy outcomes Voigt (2013, p. 4)
.

Another terminological distinction is between economic and 
political institutions. Voigt (2013, p. 7) proposes to see 
economic institutions as enabling and political institutions as 
constraining. Institutions can also be formal or informal, public 
or private, de jure or de facto, internal or external (Voigt, 
2013, pp. 6-8). Institutions also increase the level of 
predictability in a given society given incentives to make 
long-term investments.

Human capital and constraints on the executive are both 
associated with economic growth, but Glaeser et al. argues that 
human capital is a stronger predictor. The two might however be 
related as higher levels of education in a given society could 
result in electoral demands that the executive be further 
constrained... 

Voigt (2013) looks at how institutions should not be measured and 
presents a number of proposals on how to measure institutions. 
Voigt raises four points concerning the measurement of 
institutions of which two are worth mentioning:

1. the traditional aggregate measures such as ‘the rule of law’ 
  are too vague to contain meaningful information, so measures of 
  institutions should refer to specific institutions; and

2. although many established measures of institutions are 
  subjective such as the World Bank indicators and the Quality of 
  Government indicators, the objective measures are generally 
  preferable.

Moreover, to summarise the current consensus on the topic, the 
paper proposes that “institutions matter crucially for economic 
development” (2013, p. 1).

One of the conclusions of Glaeser et al. (2004) is that some of 
the work purporting to measure the influence of institutions on 
economic growth has not measured institutions, but rather 
policies (Voigt, 2013, p. 2).

Another controversy in the literature concerns whether democratic 
institutions serve as mechanims for ensuring property rights, 
thus encouraging investment and economic growth, or whether 
increased levels of human capital lead to democratic 
institutions. In essence, the question is whether democratic 
institutions are the cause or consequence of economic growth. 
This is at least how the controversy is presented in Voigt 
(2013). On closer inspection the argument seems to lend itself to 
another interpretation, namely that the views are in fact not 
conflicting, but complementary: it might both be true that human 
capital lead to democratic institutions and that democratic 
institutions lead to economic growth. The relevant question is 
rather whether democratic institutions lead to higher levels of 
human capital or vice versa.

Human capital and democratic institutions understood as 
constraints on the executive are both associated with economic 
growth, but Glaeser et al. (2004) argues that human capital is a 
stronger predictor, although they do not discredit the other camp 
that purports that democratic institutions are the main predictor 
(Voigt, 2013, p. 3). Glaeser et al. (2004) challenges the use of 
instrumental variables used in the works by Acemoglu among others 
to predict economic development of settler colonies in the US. 
They argue that human capital is a more reliable predictor of 
economic growth than institutions per se. The settlers brought 
themselves rather than their institutions.

“Many creators of indicators seem to assume simple linear 
relationships between an institution and some outcome” (Voigt, 2013, p. 10)
.

More than one institution is likely to affect observed outcome, 
so excluding any one aspect would result in omitted variable bias 
(Voigt, 2013, p. 11).

In situations where there are repeat interactions, internal 
institution trump state-run ones. Confidence (tillid) argument...

Political constraints might also have other effects than 
contributing to economic progress and development. Fatás and Mihov (2003)
 explores the effects of discretionary fiscal policy on output 
volatility and economic growth and concludes, inter alia, that 
“prudent use of fiscal policy is explained to a large extent by 
the presence of political constraints and other political and 
institutional variables.  If discretionary fiscal policy has an 
effect on economic growth, but fiscal policy is in turn 
influenced by the level of political constraints, then we have to 
be careful to bear in mind that there is an intermediating factor 
in the relationship between political constraints and economic 
growth.

Economic progress is most probably determined by a confluence of 
factors, but this project aims at looking at institutional 
variables such as the degree of political constraints and some of 
measures of institutional quality.

This paper will use the dataset constructed by W.J. Henisz and is 
called POLCONIII and POLCONV. This dataset is time series data 
with measures of political constraints from all countries in the 
world. This data will then be used as the independent variable, 
while different economic variables such as growth, unemployment, 
government debt etc. will be used as the dependent variable. 
Control variables will include measures of social capital as by Barro (1996)
.

The political constraints variable is defined as the number of 
independent veto points over policy outcomes and the distribution 
of preferences of the actors that inhabit these veto points. The 
variable is calculated as one minus the expected range of 
policies for which a change in the status quo can be agreed upon 
by veto power. An unchecked executive can always obtain policy X_{E}

 and is thus guaranteed their maximum utility of 0. Political 
constraints are thus measures as (1 – political discretion) = 0 
in the extreme case of full discretion (=1). 

Initially, we attempt a standard linear model pooling all the 
data across countries and years, which can be written as y_{it}=\alpha+\beta^{T}x_{it}+u_{it},


where i=1,...,n
 is the country index, t=1,...T
 is the time 
index and u_{it}
 a random disturbance term with mean 0 (Croissant and Millo, 2008, p. 2)
.

4 Data

The panel data set used is an unbalanced panel and made up from a 
number of sources, which are explained below.

4.1 Variables

The variables used are primarily taken from Table 3 in Henisz 
(2000) and include:

• Real Per Capita GDP Growth 

• Male Secondary Education (years) 

• Female Secondary Education (years) 

• Log(Life Expectancy) 

• Log(Fertility Rate) 

• Government Consumption (% GDP) 

• Log(Black Market Exchange Rate Premium)

• Change in the Terms of Trade

• Total Investment (% GDP) 

• Log(Law & Order Index)

• Democracy Index 

• Political Constraint Index (POLCON) 

• Political Constraint Index (POLCONJ)

In the subsections below, I will outline how and where the data 
is found, possibly transformed and what the existing literature 
has to say on the topic. Table  on page  gives some summary 
statistics of all the variables included, so if there is no table 
included in the subsections below, this table can be consulted 
for more information on the variable.

  Measures on political constraints<sub:Measures-of-POLCON>



The political constraints variable is defined as the number of 
independent veto points over policy outcomes and the distribution 
of preferences of the actors that inhabit these veto points. The 
variable is calculated as one minus the expected range of 
policies for which a change in the status quo can be agreed upon 
by veto power. An unchecked executive can always obtain policy XE 
and is thus guaranteed their maximum utility of 0. Political 
constraints are thus measures as (1 – political discretion) = 0 
in the extreme case of full discretion (=1) (Henisz, 2000). We 
expect that there is a positive relationship between the degree 
of political constraints and economic growth. This is supported 
by the results of Henisz (2000).

Table  on page  shows the some summary statistics of the 
different variations of this variable. The earliest observation 
is from , while the newest is from . POLCONIII is available for 
226 countries. The difference between POLCONIII and POLCONV is 
that the latter includes two additional veto points (the 
judiciary and the subfederal entities). POLCONV is available for 
200 countries.



The POLCON measures are strongly correlated with the ICRG risk 
indices (Henisz, 2000, p. 10).

“POLCON and POLCONJ differ in that the latter uses actual data on 
the appointment history of High Court justices to compute the 
alignment and fractionalization of the High Court.”(Henisz, 2000, p. 10)

As Henisz (2000) notes himself is the assumptions underlysing 
this measure quite strong and unrealistic, but they should 
however be regarded as a rough proxy of political constraints.

  Measures of real GDP per capita<sub:Measures-of-gdp>

Henisz (2000) uses some the same data as Barro (1996), who has 
used GDP figures from the Summers-Heston data set, or Penn World 
Table (PWT) (Heston et al., 2012). Barro (1996) uses GDP figures 
from version 5.5 of the Penn World Table, while I will be using 
the newest version 7.1. To avoid confusion it should be noted 
that in these data sets “real” means “PPP converted” instead of “
in constant price”. The variable used is rgdpl and the code book 
describes it as PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Laspeyres), derived 
from growth rates of c, g, i, at 2005 constant prices. The growth 
rate is then calculated using the formula \hat{w}_{t}=\frac{x_{t}-x_{t-1}}{x_{t-1}},

 where \hat{w}_{t}
 is real GDP growth rate for year t
 and x_{t}

 are GDP levels at year t
 (of Zurich, 2010).

The validity of the Penn World Table is discussed in Johnson et al. (2009)
 who demonstrate that the measures of GDP growth for the same 
country at the same point in time changes across successive 
versions of the data set. They propose that more “robust results 
by using national accounts data, even though they are not 
PPP-adjusted.” For practical reasons this is not possible in this 
project, so I will still be using the PWT data.

Another measures of GDP growth is found in the Global Development 
Network Growth Database (Easterly, 2001). For practical reasons, 
this measure is used instead.

As Barro (1996, p. 4) writes the neoclassical model of economic 
growth predicts that GDP growth is negatively correlated with the 
initial level of GDP. 

“Empirically, the initial level of per capita GDP enters into the 
growth equation in the form \text{log}(y_{t-1})
 so that the 
coefficient on this variable represents the rate of convergence, 
that is, the responsiveness of the growth rate, Dy_{t}
, to a 
proportional change in y_{t-1}
.”(Barro, 2003, p. 237)

The convergence effect is “conditional on the starting amount of 
human capital in the forms of educational attainment and life 
expectancy and on a set of explanatory variables that capture 
policies and national characteristics” (Barro, 2003, p. 273).



  Measures of educational attainment

Data on educational attainment is from the Barro-Lee Educational 
Attainment Dataset (Barro and Lee, 2010). Henisz (2000) mentions 
that he has his educational attainment data from Barro and Lee (1994)
, who only uses information on schooling of the adult population 
aged 25 and above, but acknowledges in a footnote that this is 
unfortunate as “much of the labor force in developing countries 
consists of younger persons.“ However, the newer data sets 
include information on schooling of the population aged 15 and 
above. The data set only has data from every fifth year.



  Measures on life expectancy

As mentioned in Barro and Lee (1994, p. 11) the data on life 
expectancy is from the UN. The data in this report, however, is 
taken from the World Bank indicator SP.DYN.LE00.IN with the name “
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)”.[footnote:
From the source notes: Life expectancy at birth indicates the 
number of years a newborn infant would live if prevailing 
patterns of mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the 
same throughout its life. Derived from male and female life 
expectancy at birth from sources such as: (1) United Nations 
Population Division. World Population Prospects, (2) United 
Nations Statistical Division. Population and Vital Statistics 
Reprot (various years), (3) Census reports and other statistical 
publications from national statistical offices, (4) Eurostat: 
Demographic Statistics, (5) Secretariat of the Pacific Community: 
Statistics and Demography Programme, and (6) U.S. Census Bureau: 
International Database.
]



  Measures on fertility rates

The indicator is taken from the World Bank (indicator 
SP.DYN.TFRT.IN) and is described as: Fertility rate, total 
(births per woman).[footnote:
[http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN]
] Moreover, the “total fertility rate represents the number of 
children that would be born to a woman if she were to live to the 
end of her childbearing years and bear children in accordance 
with current age-specific fertility rates.”



  Government Consumption (% GDP)

This measures is also taken from the Penn World Table. The 
variable is called kg and is described as Government Consumption 
Share of PPP Converted GDP Per Capita at 2005 constant prices 
(%). The basic descriptive statistics are reported in table .

The influence of government expenditure on economic growth is a 
contentious topic. Barro (1991), the seminal article on the 
topic, found a negative relationship between government 
consumption and economic growth, which the results in this 
project also find (see table  on page ).



  Black Market Exchange Rate Premium

These measures come originally from Wood (1991), but has been 
found using Easterly (2001).[footnote:
From the source notes of the Easterly (2001): Levine and Renelt; 
World's Currency Yearbook (for 1985, 1990-93); Adrian Wood, 
Global trends in real exchange rates: 1960-84, WB Discussion 
paper no. 35. 1988 (filling in missing observations); Global 
Development Finance & World Development Indicators (for 
1996-1997, calculated as (parallel Xrate/official Xrate-1)*100); 
values for industrial countries are added as 0).
] Two values have been changed from the originally downloaded 
data set, namely the observations for Myanmar and Iraq in 1999 
because it said “Err:520”. The data set has been downloaded as 
and xls file and then converted to a csv file before imported 
into the statistics programme. 

The variable has been log-transformed. As we can see in figure  
on page , the variable appears normally distributed after the 
log-transformation. In table  on page , we see the summary 
statistics of the variable before and after the 
log-transformation.

Barnett and Ho (1999) writes that “the black market premium is 
intended to serve as a measure of market distortions more broadly 
defined, and there appears to be a small but significant negative 
relationship between economic growth and the black market 
premium.” Barro and Lee (1994, p. 13) writes:

“We view the black-market premium on foreign exchange as a proxy 
for market distortions, whether due to exogenous government 
policies or to reactions to external shocks, such as changes in 
the terms of trade. (The black-market premium is also a desirable 
variable because it is objectively measurable and widely 
available.) Thus, we anticipate that a higher black-market 
premium, like other governmental distortions, lowers the 
steady-state level of output per effective worker and therefore 
reduces the growth rate for given values of the state variables.”

Emran and Shilpi (2004) has however cast some doubt on the 
validity of this indicator of the equilibrium exchange rate by 
using data from South East Asia to reject the null hypothesis 
that there is a relationship.



  Change in the Terms of Trade

This measure is also taken from Easterly (2001).Barro and Martin (2004, p. 531)
 have found a positive and significant relationship between 
between terms of trade measures and economic growth, while Barro and Lee (1994, p. 24)
 finds a positive, but insignificant relationship. The variable 
is named ToT.



  Total Investment (% GDP)

This measures is also taken from the Penn World Table. The 
variable is called ki and is described as Investment Share of PPP 
Converted GDP Per Capita at 2005 constant prices (%).

  Law & Order Index

The Law & Order Index is provided by POLCON data set. Another 
measure from the ICRG has also been included, namely the mean 
value of the ICRG variables “Corruption”, “Law and Order” and 
“Bureaucracy Quality”, scaled 0-1 from the Quality of Government 
Dataset (Teorell et al., 2011).





  Democracy Index

This variable democ is from Polity data set (Marshall et al., 2011)
. The values -66, -77 and -88 are removed from the dataset.





4.2 Data Description

The entire set of variables can be seen in table  (see p. ). Here 
the mean, median, minimum, maximum and standard deviation values 
are reported.





5 Statistical Model

The first type of estimation that will be used is fixed effects 
estimation, where the unobserved effects are removed by averaging 
the model over time and thus transformed into time-demeaned data (Wooldridge, 2009, pp. 481-2)
. 

With fixed effects we allow the intercept to vary with group, or 
time, or both, while the other parameters are generally still 
assumed to be homogeneous (Croissant and Millo, 2008, p. 42).

6 Estimation and Misspecification Testing

6.1 Estimation Results

In table  on page , we see the results of fixed effects 
estimation with individual effects. Here we estimate the 
relationship between the measure of political constraints POLCONV 
allowing for individual-specific, time-invariant effects. Models 
(2) through (6) use individual-specific, time-invariant effects 
to estimate the different measures of political constraints and 
institutions. As we can see the only other significant indicator 
is the democracy indicator from the PolityIV data set. The law & 
order measure and the risk measure from ICRG are only available 
for few countries, so the number of observations drops 
significantly. Most of the coefficients correspond to the 
findings of Henisz (2000).

In table  on page , we allow for both individual and time 
effects. Going from one to other does not change the sign of any 
of the variables, but some of the significance levels change, 
e.g. terms of trade becomes significant. Finally, we produce the 
results using only time effects in table  on page  and pooled 
regression results in table  on page .



6.2 Mis-specification Tests

There are seven assumptions underlying the use of fixed effects 
estimation, but we only require four to have an unbiased 
estimator (Wooldridge, 2009, pp. 503-4). In this section I will 
discuss some of the issues pertaining to these assumptions.

The second assumption is that we have a random sample from the 
cross section. Already this assumption might be violated, because 
it is probably not random for which countries we have data. That 
is to say that the countries for which we do not have data may 
have a significant impact on the results if included in the 
analysis.

Another assumption is that there exist no perfect linear 
relationship among the explanatory variables. As mentioned in the 
section [sub:Measures-of-POLCON], there is strong correlation 
among the individual measures of institutional quality and 
political constraint, so these are not included at the same time 
in the model.

Below we adopt a number of tests of model (1).

We can test whether there are indeed effects at an individual or 
time level using the Lagrange multiplier test (Croissant and Millo, 2008, p. 21)
. The test below tests the null that the individual and time 
effects in model (1) are insignificant using the method suggested 
by Gourieroux et al. (1982). Based on the large \chi^{2}
 value 
we reject that the individual and time effects are insignificant.



In the test below we test whether we can allow for individual 
effects based on the test proposed by Breusch and Pagan (1980). 
Here we again reject the null that the individual effects of 
model (1) are insignificant.



Since the estimated variance of the individual effect is negative 
when using random effects this estimation method has not been 
used in the this project, but had it been, it would have been 
paramount to use the Hausman test (Hausman, 1978) to compare a 
random effects model and a fixed effects model.

We can also use the unobserved effects test as proposed by Wooldridge (2001)
 with the null hypothesis that there are no unobserved effects in 
the residuals in the pooled model (Croissant and Millo, 2008, p. 23)
. The results of this test are reported below. As we can see, we 
can only reject the null hypothesis at the 10% significance 
level, which provides some evidence that there indeed are 
unobserved effects in the model. This could be due to the lack of 
inclusion of the initial gdp level as discussed in section [sub:Measures-of-gdp]
.



It could also be relevant to test for serial correltion in the 
idiosyncratic errors of the fixed effects model with individual 
effects. This is done in the test below, do we reject the null 
that the idiosyncratic errors are uncorrelated.



7 Conclusions

In this project we have tested whether political constraints or 
institutiona factors, or both, affect economic growth. We have 
found a statistical significant estimator of the measure of 
political constraints POLCONV and the democracy index provided by 
PolityIV when using fixed effects estimation allowing for 
individual effects using a number of control variables.

Further efforts in this vein, could look at (partial; ceteris 
paribus) relationship between political constraints and economic 
growth, which could be argued is concave such that it is 
initially important up to a point wherefrom it becomes 
detrimental to economic growth. Other interesting variables might 
include trust or failure tolerance of a country.




[LaTeX Command: bibtex]



